Computer - A programmable electronic device that can store, retrieve, and process digital dataHardware - The electronic machinery (wires, circuits, etc.) Software - Programs (instructions) and data Key Parts of Computer Hardware:Processor - hardware that executes instructionsMain Memory (DRAM)- hardware that stores data and programs, byte-level addressingDisk - Similar to memory, but persistent, slower, and higher capacity Network interface controller(NIC) - sends and retrieves data over the networkKey Aspects of Software:Instruction - command understood by the hardwareProgram - A collection of instructions for hardware and to execute Programming language - A human-readable formal language to write programApplication Programming Interface(API) - set of programs for use Data - Digital representation of information that is stored, processed Main Kinds of Software:Firmware - Read-only programs that offer basic hardware control Operating System(OS) - A collection of interrelated programs that enable application/software to use hardware easily. Ex. Windows, MacOS, LinuxApplication Software - A program to manipulate data (Excel, Chrome,PostgreSQL)Data Systems Infrastructure:Data acquisition/preparation: Python, scikit-learn, RFeature Engineering Training & Inference Model Selection: TensorFlow,PyTorchServing/Monitoring: Dask, Spark, AWS Data Representation of Data:Bits: All digital data are sequences of 0 & 1 (binary digits)Amenable to high-low/off-on electromagnetismLayers of abstraction to interpret bit sequencesGiven k bits, we can represent 2 unique data items 𝑘Data type: First layer of abstraction to interpret a bit sequence with a human-understandable category of information(common: Boolean, Byte,Integer)Example: Boolean, Byte, Integer, “floating point” number (Float),Character, and StringData structure: A second layer of abstraction to organize multiple instances of data types as a more complex object with specified properties Examples: Array, Linked list, Tuple, Graph, etc.A Byte(8 bits): the basic unit of data typesRepresents 2^8 unique data items𝐶𝑒𝑖𝑙( 𝐿𝑜𝑔 bits needed to distinguish k data items 2(𝑘)) Boolean:E.g: Y/N or T/F responsesJust 1 bit neededActual size is almost always 1B, i.e., 7 bits are wasted!Extra 7 bits for accessing information Integer:E.g: # of friends, age, # of likesTypically 4 bytes; Many variants (short, unsigned, etc.)Java int can represent -231 to (231 - 1)C unsigned int can represent 0 to (232 - 1)Python3 int is effectively unlimited length (PL magic!)Hexadecimal representation: more succinct and readableBase 16 instead of base 2 cuts display length by ~4xDigits are 0, 1, ... 9, A (10 ), B,…F ( ) 10 1510Each hexadecimal digit represents 4 bitsFrom Hexadecimal to binary: 2F → 0010 1111Floats: half(2B); single(4B); double(8B)E.g: salary, scores, model weightsSingle-precision: 4B long; ~8 decimal digits (Java, C)Double-precision: 8B long; ~16 decimal digits (Python) Floating point arithmetic (addition and multiplication) is not associativeExponent 0xFF and fraction 0 is +/- “Infinity”Exponent 0xFF and fraction <> 0 is “NaN” Character(Char):E.g: Represents letters, numerals, punctuations, etc1 Byte in C, 2 Byte in JavaPython does not have a char type, use str or bytesString: variable sized array of charDigital object: Collections of basic data types(string, array, set, bytes, integers, floats, and characters)Serialization: The process of converting a data structure (or program objects in general) into a neat sequence of bytes that can be exactly recoveredSerializing bytes and characters/strings is trivial 2 alternatives for serializing integers/floats:As byte stream (aka “binary type” in SQL)As string, e.g., 4B integer 5 -> 2B string as “5”String ser. common in data science (CSV, TSV, etc.)We often convert a trained model into a format that can be stored or transmitted. This involves transforming it into a sequence of bytes that can be written to disk or sent over network (i.e. we have to serialize it) We can serialize any other ML related artifacts like transformers, data, metadata, etc.Deserialization: the process of converting a serialized model back to its original data structure to be used for inference.We load it back into memory for inference or evaluation purposes Can be implemented in various formats, such as JSON, protocol buffers, or Apache Avro.Basics of Processors:Processor: Hardware to orchestrate and execute instructions to manipulate data as specified by a programExamples: CPU, GPU, FPGA, TPU, embedded, etc.Instruction Set Architecture (ISA):The vocabulary of commands of a processorSpecifies bit length/format of machine code commandsHas several commands to manipulate register contentsLoad-store architecture - How processor executes machine code Register: Tiny local memory (“scratch space”) on processors into which instructions and data are copiedCaches: Small local memory to buffer instructions/data Types of ISA commands to manipulate register contents: Memory access: load (copy bytes from DRAM address to register); store (reverse); put constantArithmetic & logic on data items in registers (ALU): add/multiply/etc.; bitwise ops; compare, etc.Control flow (branch, call, etc.)Processor PerformanceModern CPUs can run millions of instructions per secondISA influences #clock cycles each instruction needsCPU’s clock rate lets us convert that to runtime (ns)Most programs do not keep the CPU always busyMemory access commands stall the processor Worse, data may not be in DRAM—wait for disk I/O! Actual execution runtime of program may be orders of magnitude higher than what clock rate calculation suggests The arithmetic & Logic Unit and Control Unit are idle during memory-register transferKey Principle: Optimizing access to main memory and use of processor cache is critical for processor performance→ Due to OOM access latency differences across memory hierarchy, optimizing access to lower levels and careful use of higher levels is critical for overall system performance!Locality of Reference: Many programs tend to access memory locations in a somewhat predictable manner Spatial: Nearby locations will be accessed soonTemporal: Same locations accessed again soonLocality can be exploited to reduce runtimes using caching and/or prefetching across all levels in the hierarchyConcepts of Memory ManagementCaching: Buffering a copy of bytes from lower level at higher level to exploit localityPrefetching: Preemptively retrieving bytes (typically data) from addresses not explicitly asked yet by programSpill/Miss/Fault: Data needed for program is not yet available at a higher level; need to get it from lower level Register Spill(register to cache);Cache Miss(cache to main memory)“Page” Fault (main memory to disk)Hit: Data needed is already available at higher level Cache Replacement Policy: Policies of when new data needs to be loaded to a higher level, which old data to evict to make room? Many policies exist with different propertiesMemory Hierarchy in ActionLocality of Reference in Data Science:Data Layout: The order in which data items of a complex data structure or an abstract data type (ADT) are laid out in memory/diskData Access Pattern (of a program on a data object): The order in which a program has to access items of a complex data structure in memory Hardware Efficiency (of a program):How close actual execution runtime is to best possible runtime given the CPU clock rate and ISAImproved with careful data layout of all data objects used by a program based on its data access patterns Key Principle: Raise cache hits; reduce memory stalls!The first one B[k][j] misses; each * op is a stall!Matrices/tensors are ubiquitous in statistics/ML/DL programs Decades of optimized hardware-efficient libraries exist for matrix/tensor arithmetic (linear algebra) that reduce memory stalls and increase parallelism (more on parallelism later)Multi-core CPUs: BLAS/LA PACK (C), Eigen (C++), la4j (Java),NumPy/SciPy (Python; can wrap BLAS)GPUs: cuBLAS, cuSPARSE, cuDNN, cuDF, cuGraphMemory Hierarchy in PA0Pandas DataFrame needs data to fit entirely in DRAMDask DataFrame automatically manages Disk vs DRAM for uFull data sits on Disk, brought to DRAM upon compute()Dask stages out computations using PandasTradeoff: Dask may throw memory configuration issuesRole of an OS in a ComputerAn OS is a large set of interrelated programs that make it easier for applications and user-written programs to use computer hardware effectively, efficiently, and securelyWithout OS, computer users must speak machine code 2 key principles in OS (any system) design & implementation: Modularity: Divide system into functionally cohesive components that each do their jobs wellOrchestra example: Consider a conductor orchestrating different sectionsAbstraction: Layers of functionalities from low-level (close to hardware) to high level (close to user)Car example: A pedal to transmission to engine to wheels1/0 = secondary input/output*1 ex . Chu+ GPT1) EX. IOC*Everything has through bus [no point to points.*14*3SKey Components of OS API of OS called “System Call”Kernel: The core of an OS with modules to abstract the hardware and APIs for programs to useAuxiliary parts of OS include shell/terminal, file browser for usability, extra programs installed by I/O devices, etc.The Abstraction of a ProcessProcess Management: Virtualize processor ‘process abstraction; concurrency’Main Memory Management: virtualize main memoryFilesystems: virtualize disk; “file” abstractionNetworking: Communication over networkDevice Drivers: Talk to other I/O devicesProcess: A running program, the central abstraction in OSStarted by OS when a program is executed by user OS keeps inventory of “alive” processes (Process List) and handles apportioning of hardware among processesA query is a program that becomes a processA data system typically abstracts away process management because user specifies the queries/processes in system’s API High-level steps OS takes to get a process going:1.Create a process (get Process ID; add to Process List)2. Assign part of DRAM to process, aka its Address Space3. Load code and static data (if applicable) to that space4. Set up the inputs needed to run program’s main()5. Update process’ State to Ready6. When the process is scheduled (Running), the OS temporarily hands off control to the process to run the show!7. Eventually, process finishes or run Destroy Virtualization of Hardware ResourcesOS has mechanisms and policies to regain controlVirtualization: Each hardware resource is treated as a virtual entity thatOS can divide up and share among processes in a controlled way Limited Direct Execution:OS mechanism to time-share CPU and preempt a process to run a different one, aka “context switch”A Scheduling policy tells OS what time-sharing to useProcesses also must transfer control to OS for “privileged” operations (e.g., I/O); System Calls API Virtualization of Processors:Virtualization of processor enables process isolation (i.e., each process given an “illusion” that it alone runs)Inter-process communication possible in System Calls APILater: Generalize to Thread abstraction for concurrencyProcess Management by OSOS keeps moving processes between 3 states:Sometimes, if a process gets “stuck” and the OS does not schedule something else, the system hangs; it needs to reboot!Scheduling Policies/AlgorithmsSchedule: Record of what process runs on each CPU & when Policy controls how OS time-shares CPUs among processes Key terms for a process (aka job):Arrival Time: Time when process gets createdJob Length: Duration of time needed for processStart Time: Times when process first starts on processorCompletion Time: Time when process finishes/killedResponse Time = [Start Time] – [Arrival Time]Turnaround Time = [Completion Time] – [Arrival Time]Workload: Set of processes, arrival times, and job lengths that OSScheduler has to handleIn general, the OS may not know all Arrival Times and Job Lengths beforehand! But preemption is possibleKey Principle: Inherent tension in scheduling between overall workload performance and allocation fairnessPerformance metric is usually Average Turnaround Time Fairness: Many metrics exist (e.g., Jain’s fairness index) 100s of scheduling policies studied!We will be overviewing some well-known ones:FIFO (First-In-First-Out) SJF (Shortest Job First)SCTF (Shortest Completion Time First)Round Robin Random, etc.Different criteria for ranking; preemptive vs not Complex “multi-level feedback queue” schedulers ML-based schedulers are “hot” nowadays!First-In-First-Out aka First-Come-First-Served (FCFS)Ranking criterion: Arrival Time; no preemption allowed Main con: Short jobs may wait a lot, aka “Convoy Effect” Shortest Job First (SJF):Ranking criterion: Job Length; no preemption allowed Main con: Not all Job lengths might be unknown beforehand.Shortest Completion Time First (SCFT):Ranking criterion: Jobs might not all arrive at same time; preemption possibleMain con same as SJF: Job lengths might be unknown beforehand Round Robin:In Round Robin job lengths need not be knownRanking criterion: Fixed time quantum given to each job; cycle through jobsMain con: RR is often very fair, but Avg Turnaround Time goes upDRAM vs. DiskDRAM is much faster, DRAM is volatile while disk is not, DRAM has less capacity. DRAM is more expensive.Concurrency:Modern computers often have multiple processors and multiple cores per processorConcurrency: Multiple processors/cores run different/same set of instructions simultaneously on different/shared dataNew levels of shared caches are addedMultiprocessing: Different processes run on different cores (or entireCPUs) simultaneouslyThread: Generalization of OS’s Process abstractionA program spawns many threads; each run parts of the program’s computations simultaneouslyMultithreading: Same core used by many threadsIssues in dealing with multithreaded programs that write shared data:Cache coherenceLocking; deadlocksComplex schedulingScheduling for multiprocessing/multicore is more complex Load Balancing: Ensuring different cores/proc. are kept roughly equally busy, i.e., reduce idle timesMulti-queue multiprocessor scheduling (MQMS) is commonEach processor/core has its own job queue OS moves jobs across queues based on load Example Gantt chart for MQMS:Thankfully, most data-intensive computations in data science do not need concurrent writes on shared data! Although we often need concurrent readsConcurrent low-level ops abstracted away by libraries/APIsPartitioning / replication of data simplifies concurrency Later topic (Parallelism Paradigms) will cover parallelism in depth:Multi-core, multi-node, etc.Task parallelism, Partitioned data parallelism, etc.File and Directory:File: A persistent sequence of bytes that stores a logically coherent digital object for an applicationFile Format: An application-specific standard that dictates how to interpret and process a file’s bytes1000s of file formats exist (e.g., TXT, DOC, GIF, MPEG); varying data models/types, domain-specific, etc.Metadata: Summary or organizing info. about file content(aka payload)stored with file itself; format-dependentDirectory: A cataloging structure with a list of references to files and/or(recursively) other directoriesTypically treated as a special kind of file.Sub-dir., Parent dir., Root dir.FilesystemFilesystem: The part of OS that helps programs create, manage, and delete files on disk (secondary storage)Roughly split into logical level and physical level:Logical level exposes file and directory abstractions and offersSystem Call APIs for file handlingPhysical level works with disk firmware and moves bytes to/from disk to DRAMDozens of filesystems exist, e.g., ext2, ext3, NTFS, etc.Differ on:how they layer file and directory abstractions as bytes, what metadata is stored, etc.how data integrity/reliability is assured, support for editing/resizing, compression/encryption, etc.Some can work with (can be “mounted” by) multiple OSs.OS abstracts a file on disk as a virtual object for processesFile Descriptor: An OS-assigned positive integer identifier/ reference for a file’s virtual object that a process can use:0/1/2 reserved for STDIN/STDOUT/STDERRFile Handle: A PL’s abstraction on top of a file descriptor (fd) System Call API for File Handling:open(): Create a file; assign fd; optionally overwrite read(): Copy file’s bytes on disk to in-mem. buffer write(): Copy bytes from in-mem. buffer to file on disk fsync(): “Flush” (force write) “dirty” data to disk close(): Free up the fd and other OS state info on it lseek(): Position offset in file’s fd (for random read/write later)Dozens more (rename, mkdir, chmod, etc.)Files v.s Databases: Data ModeDatabase: An organized collection of interrelated data Data Model: An abstract model to define organization of data in a formal (mathematically precise) wayE.g., Relations, XML, Matrices, DataFramesEvery database is just an abstraction on top of data files:Logical level: Data model for higher-level reasoningPhysical level: How bytes are layered on top of files All data systems (RDBMSs, Dask, Spark, PyTorch, etc.) are application/platform software that use OS System Call API for handling data filesData as File: StructuredStructured Data: A form of data with regular substructure Relational Database, Matrix, Tensor, DataFrame, sequence:Matrix and DF have row/col numbers, relation is orderless (TSV,CSV)Transpose support only by Matrix, DFMost RDBMSs and Spark serialize a relation as binary file(s), often compressedDifferent RDBMSs and Spark/HDFS-based tools serialize relation/tabular data in different binary formats, often compressed:One file per relation; row vs columnar (e.g., ORC, Parquet) vs hybrid formatsRDBMS vendor-specific vs open ApacheParquet becoming especially popularComparing Structured Data ModelsOrdering: Matrix and DataFrame have row/col numbers; Relation is orderless on both axes!Schema Flexibility: Matrix cells are numbers. Relation tuples conform to pre-defined schema. DataFrame has no pre-defined schema but all rows/cols can have names; col cells can be mixed types! Transpose: Supported by Matrix & DataFrame, not Relation Semistructured Data: A form of data with less regular / more flexible substructure than structured data Tree-Structured:Typically serialized as a restricted ASCII text file (extensionsXML, JSON, YML, etc.)Some data systems also offer binary file formats Can layer on Relations too Graph-Structured:Typically serialized with JSON or similar textual formatsSome data systems also offer binary file formatsAgain, can layer on Relations tooUnstructured: Data Files on Data “Lakes”Data “Lake”: Loose coupling of data file format for storage and data/query processing stackJSON for raw data; Parquet processed is common &Tradoffs: Pros and cons of Parquet vs text-based files (CSV, JSON, etc.):Less storage: Parquet stores in compressed form; can be much smaller (even 10x); less I/O to readColumn pruning: Enables app to read only columns needed to DRAM; even less I/O now!Schema on file: Rich metadata, stats inside format itselfComplex types: Can store them in a columnHuman-readability: Cannot open with text apps directlyMutability: Parquet is immutable/read-only; no in-place edits Decompression/Deserialization overhead: Depends on application toolAdoption in practice: CSV/JSON support more pervasive butParquet is catching up, especially in enterprise “big data” situationsData as File: Other Common FormatsMachine Perception data layer on tensors and/or time-series Myriad binary formats, typically with (lossy) compression, e.g., WAV for audio, MP4 for video, etc.Text File (aka plaintext): Human-readable ASCII charactersDocs/Multimodal File: Myriad app-specific rich binary formatsVirtualization of GRAM with PagesPage: An abstraction of fixed size chunks of memory/storageMakes it easier to virtualize and manage DRAMPage Frame: Virtual slot in DRAM to hold a page’s contentPage size is usually an OS configuration parameterE.g., 4KB to 16KBOS Memory Management has mechanisms to:Identify pages uniquely (page frame 0 for OS)Read/write page from/to disk when requested by a process Apportioning of DRAM: Elements A process’s Address Space:Slice of virtualize DRAM assigned to it alone! OS “translates” DRAM vs disk address Page Replacement Policy:When DRAM fills up, which cached page to evict? Many policies in OS literature Memory Leaks:Process forgot to “free” pages used a while agoWastes DRAM and slows down systemGarbage Collection:Some PL implementations can auto-reclaim some wasted memoryStoring Data In MemoryAny data structure in memory is overlaid on pagesProcess can ask OS for more memory in System Call API If OS denies, process may crash Apache Arrow:Emerging standard for columnar in-memory data layout Compatible with Pandas, (Py)Spark, Parquet, etc.Persistent Data StorageHard Disk, CD, SSDsSSDs has a key latency dichotomy for random vs. sequential data Volatile Memory: A data storage device that needs power/electricity to store bits; e.g., DRAM, CPU caches (SRAM)Persistence: Program state/data is available intact even after process finishesNon-Volatile or Persistent memory/storage: A data storage device that retains bits intact after power cyclingE.g., all levels below DRAM in memory hierarchy “Persistent Memory (PMEM)”: Marketing term for large DRAM that is backed up by battery power!Non-Volatile RAM (NVRAM): Popular term for DRAM-like device that is genuinely non-volatile (no battery)Note: PMEM and NVRAM are typically used in high-performance servers and storage systems where fast, reliable access to data is critical.Disk and Data Organization on DiskDisk: Aka secondary storage; likely holds the vast majority of the world’s day-to-day business-critical data!Data storage/retrieval units: disk blocks or pagesUnlike RAM, different disk pages have different retrieval times based on location:Need to optimize layout of data on disk pagesOrders of magnitude performance gaps possibleDisk space is organized into filesFiles are made up of disk pages aka blocks(basic unit) Typical disk block/page size: 4KB or 8KB:Basic unit of reads/writes for a diskOS/RAM page is not the same as disk page!Typically, [OS/RAM page size] = [Disk page size] but not always; disk page can be a multiple, e.g., 1MBFile data (de-)allocated in increments of disk pagesMagnetic Hard DisksKey Principle: Sequential vs. Random Access Dichotomy Accessing disk pages in sequential order gives higher throughput Random reads/writes are OOM slower!Need to carefully lay out data pages on disk, not the case for DRAM Abstracted away by data systems: Dask, Spark, RDBMSs, etc.Flash SSD vs. Magnetic Hard DisksRandom reads/writes are not much worseDifferent locality of reference for data/file layoutBut still block-addressable like HDDsData access latency: 100x faster! (Note: Access ~ Lookup)Data transfer throughput: Also 10-100x higher (Note: Access ~ Read/WriteParallel read/writes more feasible Cost per GB is 5-15x higher!Read-write impact asymmetry; much lower lifetimesNVRAM vs. Magnetic Hard Disks NVRAM is like a non-volatile form of DRAM, but with similar capacity as SSDsRandom R/W with less to no SSD-style wear and tearByte-addressability (not blocks like SSDs/HDDs) Spatial locality of reference like DRAM; radical change!Latency, throughput, parallelism, etc. similar to DRAMAlas, limited to HPC and enterprise environmentsCloud computingCloud: shared-Disk, shared-memory, [shared nothing] Compute, storage, memory, networking, etc. are virtualized and exist on remote servers; rented by application users Main pros of cloud vs on-premise clusters:Manageability: Managing hardware is not user’s problem Pay-as-you-go: Fine-grained pricing economics based on actual usage (granularity: seconds to years!) Elasticity: Can dynamically add or reduce capacity based on actual workload’s demandInfrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) (IT Administrators):Compute:Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) (PA)Elastic Container Service (ECS)Serverless compute engines:Fargate (serverless containers), Lambda (serverless functions) Storage:Simple storage service (S3)Elastic Block Store (EBS)Elastic File System (EFS) Glacier (storage classes) Networking:CloudFront (low latency content delivery)Virtual Private Cloud (VPC)Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) (Software Developer):Database/Analytics Systems:Aurora, Redshift, Neptune, ElastiCache, DynamoDB,Timestream, EMR, AthenaBlockchain: QLDBIoT: GreengrassML/AI: SageMaker* (both Paas and SaaS) Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) (End-user):ML/AI: SageMaker*, Elastic Inference, Lex, Polly,Translate, Transcribe, Textract, Rekognition,Ground TruthBusiness Apps: Chime, WorkDocs, WorkMail Evolution of Cloud Infrastructure:Data Center: Physical space from which a cloud is operated 3 generations of data centers/clouds:Cloud 1.0 (Past): Networked servers; user rents servers(timesliced access) needed for data/software Cloud 2.0 (Current): “Virtualization” of networked servers; user rents amount of resource capacity; cloud provider has a lot more flexibility on provisioning (multi-tenancy, load balancing, more elasticity, etc.) Cloud 3.0 (Ongoing Research): “Serverless” and disaggregated resources all connected to fast networks Modern networks in data centers have become much faster: In terms of gigabit Ethernet connection speeds, one can find speeds in the order of magnitude 100GbE to even TbE! Decoupling of compute+memory from storage is common in cloudHybrids of shared-disk parallelism+shared-nothing parallelismE.g, store datasets on S3 and read as needed to local EBSNew Cloud Renting ParadigmsCloud 2.0’s flexibility enables radically different paradigmsAWS example below; Azure and GCP have similar gradations Such bundling means some applications might under-utilize some resources!Serverless paradigm gaining traction for some applications, e.g., online ML prediction serving on websites User gives a program (function) to run and specifies CPU and DRAM neededCloud provider abstracts away all resource provisioning entirelyHigher resource efficiency; much cheaper, often by 10x vs Spot instancesAka Function-as-a-Service (FaaS)Logical next step in serverless direction: full resource disaggregation! That is, compute, memory, storage, etc. are all network-attached and elastically added/removed Is all this complexity worth it?:Depends on the user's/application’s Pareto tradeoffs! On-premise cluster are still common in large enterprises, healthcare, and academia; “hybrid clouds” tooRecall main pros of cloud: manageability, cost, and elasticity Some main cons of cloud (vs on-premise): Complexity of composing cloud APIs and licenses; data scientists must keep relearning; “CloudOps” teams Cost over time can crossover and make it costlier!Easier to waste money accidentally on the fly“Lock-in” by cloud vendorPrivacy, security, and governance concerns Internet disruption or unplanned downtime, e.g., AWS outage in 2015 made Netflix, Tinder, etc. unavailable! Layers of typical cloud: Compute, Storage, Networking Spot vs On-Demand:On-demand has static priceNeed manual launch requestYou can determine when to interrupt instanceBias-Variance Tradeoff of MLWhen prediction target complexity is high, more training data coupled with more complex models yield higher accuracy as number of training examples grows High Bias: Roughly, model is not rich enough to represent dataHigh Variance: Model overfits to given data; poor generalization Large-scale training data lowers variance and raises accuracy!Why Large-Scale Data?Large-scale data is a game changer in data science: Enables study of granular phenomena in sciences, businesses, etc. not possible beforeEnables new applications and personalization/customizationEnables more complex ML prediction targets andmitigates variance to offer high accuracy Hardware has kept pace to power the above:Storage capacity has exploded (PB clusters)Compute capacity has grown (multi-core, GPUs, etc.)DRAM capacity has grown (10GBs to TBs)Cloud computing is “democratizing” access to hardware;SaaSBig DataBig Data Typical characterization by 3 Vs:Volume: larger than single-node DRAMVariety: relations, docs, tweets, multimedia, etc.Velocity: high generation rate, e.g., sensors, surveillanceParallel Data ProcessingBasic Idea: Split up workload across processors and perhaps also across machines/workers (aka “Divide and Conquer”)Common in parallel data processing: “threads”Generalization of process abstraction of OSA program/process can spawn many threadsEach runs its part of program’s computations simultaneouslyAll threads share address space (so, data too)In multi-core CPUs, a thread uses up 1 core“Hyper-threading”: Virtualizes a core to run 2 threads!Common in parallel data processing: “Dataflow Graph”: A directed graph representation of a program with vertices being abstract operations from a restricted set of computational primitives:Extended relational dataflows: RDBMS, Pandas, ModinMatrix/tensor dataflows: NumPy, PyTorch, TensorFlowEnables us to reason about data-intensive programs at a higher level(logical level?)Task Graph: Similar but coarse-grained; vertex is a processLogical Query Plan: Relational Algebra Gate GraphNeural Computational Graph: Neural Network GraphTask ParallelismTopological sort of tasks in task graph for schedulingNotion of a “worker” can be at processor/core level, not just at node/server levelThread-level parallelism possible instead of process-level E.g., Dask: 4 worker nodes x 4 cores = 16 workers total Main pros of task parallelism:Simple to understand; easy to implement Independence of workers => low software complexity Main cons of task parallelism:Data replication across nodes; wastes memory/storageIdle times possible on workersDegree of ParallelismThe largest amount of concurrency possible in the task graph, i.e., how many task can be run simultaneously Possible Bottlenecks in Dask:Memory errors, poor optimization, huge task graphs take too long to serialize, poor scalability of scheduler, machine failures.Scaleup refers to the ability of a system to retain the same performance ratio of tasks-per-resources when both the tasks and the resources increase at same rate“Dask is a flexible library for parallel computing in Python” 2 key components:APIs for data science ops on large data Dynamic task scheduling on multi-core/multi-node Design desirables:Pythonic: Stay within PyData stack (e.g., no JVM) Familiarity: Retain APIs of NumPy, Pandas, etc.Scaling Up: Seamlessly exploit all coresScaling Out: Easily exploit cluster (needs setup)Flexibility: Can schedule custom tasks too Fast?: “Optimized” implementations under APIs “Lazy Evaluation”:Ops on data structures are NOT executed immediatelyTriggered manually, e.g., compute()Dataflow graph / task graph is built under the hood Possible Issue in Dask:Dask: Task-Parallelism best Practices:Data Partition sizes:Avoid too few chunks (low degree of par.)Avoid too many chunks (task graph overhead) Be mindful of available DRAM Rough guidelines they give:# data chunks ~ 3x-10x # cores, but # cores x chunk size must be < machine DRAM, but chunk size shouldn’t be too small (~1 GB is OK) Q: Do you tune any of these when using an RDBMS?Dask still lacks “physical data independence”!Use the Diagnostics dashboard:Monitor # tasks, core/node usage, task completion Task Graph sizes:Too large:Bottlenecks (serialization / communication / scheduling) Too small: Under-utilization of cores/nodes Rough guidelines:Tune data chunk size to adjust # tasks (see previous point)Break up a task/computationFuse tasks/computations aka “batching”, or in other cases break jobs apart into distinct stages. Execution Optimization TradeoffsBe judicious in tuning data chunk sizesBe judicious in batching vs breaking up tasksSpeedup is a function of the above factorsSingle-Instruction Multiple-Data (SIMD)A fundamental form of parallel processing in which different chunks of data are processed by the “same” set of instructions shared by multiple processing units (PUs) Aka “vectorized” instruction processing (vs “scalar”)Data science workloads are very amenable to SIMDNote: no “master” scheduler in this scenario Single-Instruction Multiple Thread (SIMT): Generalizes notion of SIMD to different threads concurrently doing so Each thread may be assigned a core or a whole PU Single-Program Multiple Data (SPMD): A higher level of abstraction generalizing SIMD operations or programs Under the hood, may use multiple processes or threadsEach chunk of data processed by one core/PUApplicable to any CPU, not just vectorized PUsMost common form of parallel programming In this case, work is distributed from a central scheduler or orchestrator.In data science computations, an often useful surrogate for completion time is the instruction throughput FLOP/s,i.e., number of floating point operations per second Modern data processing programs, especially deep learning (DL) may have billions of FLOPs aka GFLOPs!Amdahl’s Law: Formula to upper bound possible speedup A program has 2 parts: one that benefits from multi-core parallelism and one that does not Non-parallel part could be for control, memory stalls, traversing a linked listMoore's Law: The number of transistors in a dense integrated circuit doubles Practices:Linear?Task GraphDRAM is the level of memory that has the lowest latency to read data fromDennard Scaling: As transistors get smaller, their power density stays constant, so that the power use stays in proportion with area. Takeaway from hardware trends: it is hard for general-purpose CPUs to sustain FLOP-heavy programs like deep netsMotivated the rise of “accelerators” for some classes of programs Graphics Processing Unit (GPU): Tailored for matrix/tensor ops Basic idea: use tons of ALUs; massive data parallelism (SIMD on steroids); Titan X offers ~11 TFLOP/s!Tensor Processing Unit (TPU): Even more specialized tensor ops in DL inference; ~45 TFLOP/s!Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA): Configurable for any class of programs; ~0.5-3 TFLOP/s(1):Data processing programs need to go through the OS System Call API to read text files but can typically bypass that API if they want to read binary file: FALSE(2):Which of the following properties of data processing programs is sometimes exploited to help reduce runtimes?: Spatial locality of reference;Temporal locality of reference ;Parallelism in computations(Post Midterm:)How much DRAM might a machine have? Common DRAM configs:• Average Laptop: 16GB• t2.xlarge EC2 instance: 16GB (at $0.19/hour)• 2023 MacBook Pro: 32GB-96GB• Consumer Deep Learning / Gaming PC: 128GB ($288 fixed)• r7g.metal EC2 instance: 512GB (at $3.43/hour)• hpc6id.32xlarge EC2 instance: 1024GB (at $5.70/hour)Less common: u-24tb1.112xlarge: 24TB (at $218.40/hour)Scalable Data AccessCentral Issue: Large data file does not fit entirely in DRAM Basic Idea: Divide-and-conquer again. “Split” a data file (virtually or physically)and stage reads of its pages from disk to DRAM; vice versa for writes.Single-node disk: Paged access from file on local diskRemote read: Paged access from disk(s) over a networkDistributed memory: Data fits on a cluster’s total DRAMDistributed disk: Use entire memory hierarchy of clusterPaged Data Access to DRAMPage Management in DRAM CacheCaching: Retaining pages read from disk in DRAMEviction: Removing a page frame’s content in DRAMSpilling: Writing out pages from DRAM to disk❖ If a page in DRAM is “dirty” (i.e., some bytes were written but not backed up on disk), eviction requires a spill. ❖ The set of DRAM-resident pages typically changes over the lifetime of a processCache Replacement Policy: The algorithm that chooses whichpage frame(s) to evict when a new page has to be cached but theOS cache in DRAM is full❖ Popular policies include Least Recently Used, Most RecentlyUsed, etc. (more shortly)Quantifying I/O: Disk, NetworkPage reads/writes to/from DRAM from/to disk incur latency Disk I/O Cost: Abstract counting of number of page I/Os; can map to bytes given page sizeSometimes, programs read/write data over network Communication/Network I/O Cost: Abstract counting of number of pages/bytes sent/received over networkI/O cost is abstract; mapping to latency is hardware-specificExample: Suppose a data file is 40GB; page size is 4KBI/O cost to read file = 10 million page I/OsDisk with I/O throughput: 800 MB/s → 40GB/800MBps = 50sNetwork with speed: 200 MB/s → 40GB/200MBps = 200sScaling to (Local) DiskIn general, scalable programs stage access to pages of file on disk and efficiently use available DRAM ❖ Recall that typically DRAM size << Disk sizeModern DRAM sizes can be 10s of GBs; so we read a“chunk”/“block” of file at a time (say, 1000s of pages) ❖ On magnetic hard disks, such chunking leads to more sequential I/Os, raising throughput and lowering latency!❖ Similarly, write a chunk of dirtied pages at a timeGeneric Cache Replacement PoliciesWhat to do if number of page frames is too few for file? Cache Replacement Policy: Algorithm to decide which page frame(s) to evict to make spaceTypical frame ranking criteria:❖ recency of use❖ frequency of use❖ number of processes reading itTypical optimization goal: Reduce total page I/O costs A few well-known policies:❖ Least Recently Used (LRU): Evict page that was used longest ago❖ Most Recently Used (MRU): (Opposite of LRU) ❖ ML-based caching policies are “hot” nowadays!Data Layouts and Access Patterns❖ Recall that data layouts and data access patterns affect what data subset gets cached in higher level of memory hierarchy ❖ Recall matrix multiplication example and CPU caches ❖ Key Principle: Optimizing layout of data file on disk based on data access pattern can help reduce I/O costs❖ Applies to both magnetic hard disk and flash SSDs ❖ But especially critical for magnetic hard disks due to vast differences in latency of random vs sequential access!Row-store vs Column-store Layouts❖ A common dichotomy when serializing 2-D structured data(relations, matrices, DataFrames) to file on disk❖ Based on data access pattern of program, I/O costs with row- vs col-store can be orders of magnitude apart! ❖ With row-store: need to fetch all pages; I/O cost: 6 pages❖ With col-store: need to fetch only B’s pages; I/O cost: 2 pagesThis difference generalizes to higher dimensions for tensorsHybrid/Tiled/“Blocked” LayoutsDask’s DataFrameBasic Idea: Split data file (virtually or physically) and stage reads of its pages from disk to DRAM (vice versa for writes) ❖ Dask DF scales to disk-resident data via a row-store❖ “Virtual” split: each split is a Pandas DF under the hood ❖ Dask API is a “wrapper” around Pandas API to scale ops to splits and put all results together❖ If file is too large for DRAM, need manual repartition() to get physically smaller splits (< ~1GB)Modin’s DataFrameBasic Idea: Split data file (virtually or physically) and stage reads of its pages from disk to DRAM (vice versa for writes)❖ Modin’s DF aims to scale to diskresident data via a tiled store❖ Enables seamless scaling along both dimensions❖ Easier use of multi-core parallelism→ Many in-memory RDBMSs had this, e.g., SAP HANA,Oracle TimesTen→ ScaLAPACK had this for matricesScaling with Remote ReadsBasic Idea: Split data file (virtually or physically) and stage reads of its pages from disk to DRAM (vice versa for writes) ❖ Similar to scaling to local disk but not “local”:❖ Stage page reads from remote disk/disks over the network(e.g., from S3)❖ More restrictive than scaling with local disk, since spilling is not possible or requires costly network I/Os ❖ OK for a one-shot filescan access pattern❖ Use DRAM to cache; repl. policies❖ Can also use smaller local disk as cacheScaling to Disk: Non-dedup. Project Scaling to Disk: Simple Aggregates:Similar behavior with Non-dedupScaling to Disk: Group By Aggregate Q: But what if hash table > DRAM size?Program might crash depending on backend implementation. OS may keep swapping pages of hash table to/from disk; aka “thrashing” Q: How to scale to large number of groups?❖ Divide and conquer! Split up R based on values of A❖ HT for each split may fit in DRAM alone❖ Reduce running info. size if possibleScaling to Disk: Relational Select❖ Straightforward filescan data access pattern❖ Read pages/chunks from disk to DRAM one by one❖ CPU applies predicate to tuples in pages in DRAM❖ Copy satisfying tuples to temporary output pages❖ Use LRU for cache replacement, if needed❖ I/O cost: 6 (read) + output # pages (write)Scaling to Disk: Relational SelectScaling to Disk: Matrix Sum of Squares Scalable Matrix/Tensor Algebra:❖ In general, tiled partitioning is more common for matrix/tensor ops ❖ DRAM-to-disk scaling:❖ pBDR, SystemDS, and Dask Arrays for matrices❖ SciDB, Xarray for n-d arrays❖ CUDA for DRAM-GPU caches scaling of matrix/tensor ops Numerical Optimization in ML:Many regression and classification models in ML are formulated as a(constrained) minimization problem❖ E.g., logistic and linear regression, linear SVM, DL classification and regression.❖ Aka “Empirical Risk Minimization” (ERM) approach❖ Computes “loss” of predictions over labeled examples❖ Hyperplane-based models aka Generalized Linear Models(GLMs) use f() that is a scalar function of distances: w^{T}x_{i}Batch Gradient Descent for ML❖ Learning rate is a hyper-parameter selected by user or“AutoML” tuning procedures❖ Number of epochs (iterations) of BGD also hyper-parameterData Access Pattern of BGD at Scale❖ The data-intensive computation in BGD is the gradient❖ In scalable ML, dataset D may not fit in DRAM❖ Model w is typically (but not always) small and DRAM-resident❖ Gradient is like SQL SUM over vectors (one per example)❖ At each epoch, 1 filescan over D to get gradient❖ Update of w happens normally in DRAM❖ Monitoring across epochs (or iterations) for convergence needed❖ Loss function L() is also just a SUM in a similar mannerI/O Cost of Scalable BGD❖ Straightforward filescan data access pattern for SUM ❖ Similar I/O behavior as non-dedup. project and simple SQL aggregates❖ I/O cost: 6 (read) + output # pages (write for final w)Stochastic Gradient Descent for ML ❖ Two key cons of BGD:❖ Often, too many epochs to reach optimal❖ Each update of w needs full scan: costly I/Os, full design matrix in memory❖ Stochastic GD (SGD) mitigates both cons❖ Basic Idea: Use a sample (mini-batch) of D to approximate gradient instead of “full batch” gradient❖ Done without replacement❖ Randomly reorder/shuffle D before every epoch❖ Sequential pass: sequence of mini-batches ❖ Another big pro of SGD: works better for non-convex loss too, especially DL❖ SGD often called the “workhorse” of modern ML/DL Access Pattern of Scalable SGD:I/O Cost of (Very) Scalable SGD:❖ I/O cost of random shuffle is non-trivial; need so-called “external merge sort” (skipped in this course)❖ Typically amounts to 1 or 2 passes over file❖ Mini-batch gradient computations: 1 filescan per epoch:❖ As filescan proceeds, count # examples seen, accumulate perexample gra ❖ Typical mini-batch sizes: 10s to 1000s... or 1 if transformer model and limited resources...❖ Orders of magnitude more model updates than BGD!❖ Total I/O cost per epoch: 1 shuffle cost + 1 filescan cost❖ Often, shuffling only once upfront suffices❖ Loss function L() computation is same as before (for BGD)Too Big To Fit, scale-up vs.scale-outWhen an application becomes too big or too complex to run efficiently on a single server, there are some options:1:migrate to a larger server, and buy bigger licenses–vertical scale up2:distribute data+compute across multiple servers–horizontal scale out The histories of MPI, Hadoop, Spark, Dask, etc., represent generations of scale-out, which imply trade-offs both for the risks as well as the Inherent overhead costs Why Ray:Machine learning is pervasive / Distributed computing is a necessityPython is the default language for DS/ML What is Ray?A simple/general-purpose library for distributed computing● An ecosystem of Python libraries (for scaling ML and more)● Runs on laptop, public cloud, K8s, on-premiseA layered cake of functionality and capability for scaling ML workloadsRay Core: Tasks / Actors / ObjectsRay AI Runtime is a scalable runtime/toolkit for end-to-end ML applications.Ray Basic Design Patterns● Ray Parallel Tasks○ Functions as stateless units of execution○ Functions distributed across the cluster as tasks● Ray Objects as Futures○ Distributed (immutable objects) store in the cluster○ Fetched when materialized○ Enable massive asynchronous parallelism● Ray Actors○ Stateful service on a cluster○ Enable Message passingScaling Design Patterns(Circle: Compute; Square: Data)Ray Task: A function remotely executed in a cluster Python → Ray APIs:Ray Task: A function remotely executed in a cluster@ray.remote(num_cpus=2) Def f(a,b): Return a+bf.remote(1,2)Ray Actor: A class remotely executed in a cluster @ray.remote(num_gpus=4) Class HostActor:Def __init__(self):Self.num_devices = os.environ["CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES"] Def f(self, output):Return f”{output}{self.num_devices}” Actor = HostActor.remote() actor.f.remote(“hi”)Dynamic task graph: build at runtime ray.get() block: until result available Distributed Applications with Ray:ML Libraries (All using Ray core APIs & patterns)● Ray AI Runtime ● Distributed scikit-learn/Joblib● Distributed XGBoost on Ray ● Ray Multiprocess PoolRay provides generic platform for LLMs Simplify orchestration and scaling:● Spot instance support for data parallel training● Easily spin up and run distributed workloads on any cloud ● Optimize CPUs/GPUs by pipelining w/ Ray Data Inference and serving:● Ability to support complex pipelines integrating business logic● Ability to support multiple node servingTraining● Integrates distributed training with distributed hyperparameter tuning w/ ML frameworksRay Key Takeaways● Distributed computing is a necessity & norm● Ray’s vision: make distributed computing simple○ Don’t have to be distributed programming expert● Build your own disruptive apps & libraries with Ray● Scale your ML workloads with Ray libraries (Ray AIR)● Ray offers the compute substrate for Generative AI workloadsIntroducing Data ParallelismBasic Idea of Scalability: Split data file (virtually or physically) and stage reads/writes of its pages between disk and DRAM Data Parallelism: Partition large data file physically across nodes/workers; within worker: DRAM-based or disk-based ❖ The most common approach to marrying parallelism and scalability in data systems❖ Generalization of SIMD and SPMD idea from parallel processors to large-scale data and multi-worker/multi-node setting❖ Distributed-memory vs Distributed-disk3 Paradigms of Multi-Node ParallelismData parallelism is technically orthogonal to these 3 paradigms but most commonly paired with shared-nothingShared-Nothing Data ParallelismData Parallelism in Other ParadigmsData Partitioning Strategies❖ Row-wise/horizontal partitioning is most common (sharding) ❖ 3 common schemes (given k nodes):❖ Round-robin: assign tuple i to node i MOD k❖ Hashing-based: needs hash partitioning attribute(s) ❖ Range-based: needs ordinal partitioning attribute(s) ❖ Tradeoffs:❖ For Relational Algebra (RA) and SQL:❖ Hashing-based most common in practice for RA/SQL❖ Range-based often good for range predicates in RA/SQL❖ But all 3 are often OK for many ML workloads (why?)❖ Replication of partition across nodes (e.g., 3x) is common to enable “fault tolerance” and better parallel runtime performanceOther Forms of Data Partitioning❖ Just like with disk-aware data layout on single-node, we can partition a large data file across workers in other ways too:Cluster Architectures:Manager-Worker Architecture:❖ 1 (or few) special node called Manager (aka “Server” or archaic“Master”); 1 or more Workers❖ Manager tells workers what to do and when to talk to other nodes❖ Most common in data systems (Dask, Spark, par. RDBMS, etc.)Peer-to-Peer Architecture❖ No special manager❖ Workers talk to each other directly❖ E.g., Horovod❖ Aka Decentralized (vs Centralized)Bulk Synchronous Parallelism (BSP)❖ Most common protocol of data parallelism in data systems (e.g., in parallel RDBMSs, Hadoop, Spark)❖ Shared-nothing sharding + manager-worker architecture1. Sharded data file on workers2. Client gives program to manager (SQL query, ML training, etc.)3. Manager divides first piece of work among workers4. Workers work independently on self’s data partition (cross-talk can happen if Manager asks)5. Worker sends partial results to Manager6. Manager waits till all k done 7. Go to step 3 for next pieceSpeedup Analysis/Limits of of BSPSpeedup = Completion time given only 1 worker—------------------------------------------------Completion time given k (>1) workers ❖ Cluster overhead factors that hurt speedup:❖ Per-worker: startup cost; tear-down cost❖ On manager: dividing up the work; collecting/unifying partial partial results from workers❖ Communication costs: talk between manager-worker and across workers (when asked by manager)❖ Barrier synchronization suffers from “stragglers” (workers that fall behind) due to skews in shard sizes and/or worker capacitiesQuantifying Benefit of ParallelismDistributed Filesystems❖ Recall definition of file; distributed file generalizes it to a cluster of networked disks and OSs❖ Distributed filesystem (DFS) is a cluster-resident filesystem to manage distributed files❖ A layer of abstraction on top of local filesystems❖ Nodes manage local data as if they are local files ❖ Illusion of a one global file: DFS APIs let nodes access data sitting on other nodes❖ 2 main variants: Remote DFS vs In-Situ DFS ❖ Remote DFS: Files reside elsewhere and read/written on demand by workers❖ In-Situ DFS: Files resides on cluster where workers existNetwork Filesystem (NFS)❖ An old remote DFS (c. 1980s) with simple client-server architecture for replicating files over the network Network Filesystem (NFS) ❖ Main pro: simplicity of setup and usage ❖ But many cons:❖ Not scalable to very large files❖ Full data replication❖ High contention for concurrent reads/writes❖ Single-point of failureHadoop Distributed File System (HDFS)❖ Most popular in-situ DFS (c. late 2000s); part of Hadoop; open source spinoff of Google File system (GFS)❖ Highly scalable; scales to 10s of 1000s of nodes, PB files❖ Designed for clusters of cheap commodity nodes❖ Parallel reads/writes of sharded data “blocks”❖ Replication of blocks to improve fault tolerance❖ Cons: Read-only + batchappend (no fine-grained updates/writes)❖ NameNode’s roster maps data blocks to DataNodes/IPs ❖ A distributed file on HDFS is just a directory (!) with individual filenames for each data block and metadata files ❖ HDFS has configurable parameters:Parameter name Purpose Default valueData block size Splitting data into chunks 128 MBReplication factor Ensure data availability 3xData-Parallel Dataflow/Workflow❖ Data-Parallel Dataflow: A dataflow graph with ops wherein each operation is executed in a data-parallel manner❖ Data-Parallel Workflow: A generalization; each vertex a whole task/process that is run in a data-parallel manner Note: In parallel environments like parallel RDBMSs and Spark: Each of these extended relational ops have scalable data-parallel All input tables implementations.Distributed Computing ParadigmsDifferent paradigms and models used in distributed computing: Batch processing: Breaking tasks into smaller sub-tasks that can be processed independently.Message passing: Communication between nodes through message passing protocols like MPI.Shared memory: Multiple nodes accessing a common memory space. MapReduce: A programming model for processing large datasets in a distributed manner.Stream processing: Real-time processing of continuous data streams.Distributed File Systems → like HDFS (Hadoop)Fault Tolerance: With HDFS, the company stores multiple replicas of the data across different nodes. If a node fails, the data is still accessible from other replicas, ensuring fault tolerance and preventing data loss. Scalability: As the company's data grows, they can add more nodes to the Hadoop cluster and distribute the data across these nodes. HDFS scales horizontally, allowing the company to accommodate the increasing volume of data without compromising performance. Data Locality: When processing the customer data and performing analytics, HDFS ensures data locality by storing the data on the same nodes where the computation is performed. This reduces data transfer over the network and improves overall processing efficiency. Challenges & considerations in distributed analysis While dealing with large amounts of data the primary challenge is that it cannot fit on a single machine.Storage Tradeoff: Storing data entirely in memory yields better performance but is expensive. Disk storage is cheaper but results in lower performance.Hybrid Caching: Combination of SSD flash disks and hard disks for storing data subsets. Placement of data on appropriate storage medium is crucial.Distributing Data: Root-leaf approach for distributing data across thousands of machines. Each leaf machine holds a portion of the data, results merged at the root.Latency Impact: Latency from the slowest machine affects overall performance. Mitigating latency through optimization techniques is essential.Overhead in Data Transfer: Serialization, compression, and encryption introduce overhead. File format overhead, decryption, and decompression impact performance.Hardware Support: Encryption at rest and in motion requires hardware support. Hardware advancements crucial for efficient distributed analysis.Serialization and Interpretation: Data structures are serialized for transmission over a wire. Receiving machine must interpret the serialized data correctly.Distributed Collaborative filteringIn the diagram, the process of making collaborative filtering distributed is illustrated with two nodes (Node 1 and Node 2) as an example. Here's a breakdown of the components:1. User-Item Data: Represents the initial user-item interaction data used for collaborative filtering.2. Data Partitioning: The data is partitioned into subsets and distributed across multiple nodes.3. Local Similarity Computation: Each node independently computes local similarities (e.g., cosine similarity) based on the user-item interactions available on that node.4. Data Exchange and Aggregation: The computed similarities are exchanged and aggregated across the nodes to generate a global similarity matrix.5. Recommendation Generation: Each node utilizes the global similarity matrix and the locally available user-item interactions to generate personalized recommendations for its subset of users.6. Result Integration and Final Recommendations: The recommendations generated by each node are integrated to produce the final distributed recommendations.Language Models and Challenges in Distributed Training1. Computational Resources: Large language models require immense computational power, memory, and storage. Training and inference across distributed systems necessitate significant hardware resources 2. Communication Overhead: In distributed training, coordinating updates across multiple nodes introduces communication overhead. Efficient communication protocols and optimized data exchange mechanisms are essential.3. Data Synchronization: Ensuring consistent model parameters and synchronization of large amounts of data across nodes is a challenge. In distributed inference, managing data consistency for parallel processing can be complex.4. Scalability: Scaling distributed training and inference to accommodate growing model sizes and datasets is crucial. Load balancing and resource allocation need to be optimized for efficient scalability.How to Parallelize GPTs?The parallelization of the GPT architecture can be achieved byutilizing techniques such as model parallelism and data parallelism. Let's discu Model Parallelism: Model parallelism involves distributing the model across multiple devices or machines. In the case of GPT, where the model consists of stacked transformer layers, each layer can be allocated to different devices. This allows for parallel computation of
different layers, reducing the overall training or inference time. Model parallelism can be particularly useful when dealing with very large models that cannot fit into a single device's memory. Data Parallelism: Data parallelism involves dividing the data into multiple subsets and processing them simultaneously on different devices. In the context of GPT, the training data can be partitioned into smaller batches, and each batch is processed by a separate device or machine. The gradients calculated on each device are then synchronized and aggregated to update the model parameters. Data parallelism enables faster training by parallelizing the computation across multiple devices.Benefits of Distributed Computing for Large Language Models Scalability: Distributed computing enables efficient scaling of resources to handle large-scale training and inference workloads. Speed: Parallel processing across multiple nodes reduces the time required for training and inference tasks.Fault tolerance: Distributed systems provide resilience by replicating data and computations across multiple nodes, ensuring uninterrupted operation even in the face of failures.Real-world ApplicationsLanguage translation: Distributed computing facilitates the training and serving of language translation models that can handle large volumes of text.Content generation: Distributed language models enable the generation of coherent and contextually relevant content for various applications, such as chatbots or content personalization. Sentiment analysis: Large language models distributed across multiple nodes can process and analyze vast amounts of text data to derive sentiment insights.Considerations and ChallengesData synchronization: Ensuring consistency and synchronization of data across distributed nodes.Communication overhead: Efficient communication and coordination between nodes to minimize latency and optimize performance. Resource management: Proper allocation and management of computational resources across the distributed system.Parallel RDBMSs❖ Parallel RDBMSs are highly successful and widely used❖ Typically shared-nothing data parallelismOptimized runtime performance + enterprise-grade features:ANSI SQL & moreBusiness Intelligence (BI) dashboards/APIs Transaction management; crash recovery Indexes, auto-tuning, etc.❖ 4 new concerns of Web giants vs RDBMSs built for enterprises: ❖ Developability: Custom data models and computations hard to program on SQL/RDBMSs; need for simpler APIs❖ Fault Tolerance: Need to scale to 1000s of machines; need for graceful handling of worker failure❖ Elasticity: Need to be able to easily upsize or downsize cluster size based on workload❖ Cost: Commercial RDBMSs licenses too costly; hired own software engineers to build custom new systemsA new breed of parallel data systems called Dataflow Systems jolted the DB folks from being complacent!What is MapReduce?❖ A programming model for parallel programs on sharded data + distributed system architecture❖ Map and Reduce are terms from functional PL; software/data/ML engineer implements logic of Map, Reduce❖ System handles data distribution, parallelization, fault tolerance, etc. under the hood❖ Created by Google to solve “simple” data workload: index, store, and search the Web!❖ Google’s engineers started with MySQL! Abandoned it due toreasons listed earlier (developability, fault tolerance, elasticity, etc.)❖ Standard example: count word occurrences in a doc corpus❖ Input: A set of text documents (say, webpages) ❖ Output: A dictionary of unique words and their counts function map (String docname, String doctext) :for each word w in doctext :emit (w, 1) function reduce (String word, Iterator partialCounts) :sum = 0 for each pc in partialCounts : sum += pcemit (word, sum) (red: Part of MapReduce API)How MapReduce WorksBenefits and Catch of MapReduce❖ Goal: High-level functional ops to simplify data-intensive programs ❖ Key Benefits:❖ Map() and Reduce() are highly general; any data types/structures; great for ETL, text/multimediaNative scalability, large cluster parallelismSystem handles fault tolerance automaticallyDecent FOSS stacks (Hadoop and later, Spark)Catch: Users must learn “art” of casting program as MapReduceMap operates record-wise; Reduce aggregates globally❖ But MR libraries now available in many PLs: C/C++, Java, Python, R, Scala, etc.Abstract Semantics of MapReduceMap(): Process one “record” at a time independently❖ A record can physically batch multiple data examples/tuples❖ Dependencies across Mappers not allowed ❖ Emit 1 or more key-value pairs as output(s)❖ Data types of input vs. output can be different❖ Reduce(): Gather all Map outputs across workers sharing same key into an Iterator (list)❖ Apply aggregation function on Iterator to get final output(s) ❖ Input Split:❖ Physical-level shard to batch many records to one file “block”(HDFS default: 128MB?)❖ User/application can create custom Input Splits❖ First step: Transform text docs into relations and load: Part of theETL stageSuppose we pre-divide each doc into words w/ schema: DocWords(DocName, Word)❖ Second step: a single, simple SQL query!More MR Examples: Select Operation❖ Input Split: Shard table tuple-wise❖ Map(): On tuple, apply selection condition; if satisfies, emit key-value (KV) pair with dummy key, entire tuple as value❖ Reduce():❖ Not needed! No cross-shard aggregation here❖ These kinds of MR jobs are called “Map-only” jobsMore MR Examples: Simple Agg❖ Suppose it is algebraic aggregate (SUM, AVG, MAX, etc.) ❖ Input Split: ❖ Shard table tuple-wise ❖ Map():❖ On agg. attribute, compute incr. Stats; emit pair with single global dummy key and incr. stats as value ❖ Reduce():❖ Since only one global dummy key, Iterator has all sufficient stats to unify into global agg.More MR Examples: GROUP BY AggAssume it is algebraic aggregate (SUM, AVG, MAX, etc.)Input Split: Shard table tuple-wise Map():On agg. attribute, compute incr. Stats; emit pair with grouping
attribute as key and stats as value ❖ Reduce():❖ Iterator has all suff. stats for a single group; unify those to get result for that group❖ Different reducers will output different groups’ resultsMore MR Examples: Matrix Sum of Squares ❖ Very similar to simple SQL aggregates ❖ Input Split: ❖ Shard table tuple-wise ❖ Map():❖ On agg. attribute, compute incr. stats; emit pair with single global dummy key and stats as value ❖ Reduce():❖ Since only one global dummy key,Iterator has all sufficient stats to unify into global agg.What is Hadoop then?❖ FOSS system implementation with→ MapReduce as programming model, and→ HDFS as filesystem❖ MR user API; input splits, data distribution, shuffling, and fault tolerances handled by Hadoop under the hood❖ Exploded in popularity in 2010s: 100s of papers, 10s of products❖ A “revolution” in scalable+parallel data processing that took theDB world by surprise❖ But nowadays Hadoop largely supplanted by SparkApache Spark❖ Dataflow programming model (subsumes most of RelationalAlgebra; MR)❖ Inspired by Python Pandas style of chaining functions❖ Unified storage of relations, text, etc.; custom programs❖ Custom design (and redesign) from scratch ❖ Tons of sponsors, gazillion bucks, unbelievable hype!❖ Key idea vs Hadoop: exploit distributed memory to cache data❖ Key novelty vs Hadoop: lineage-based fault tolerance❖ Open-sourced to Apache; commercialized as DatabricksDistributed Architecture of SparkResilient Distributed Datasets Key concept in Spark.❖ RDD has been the primary user-facing API in Spark since its inception. At the core an RDD is an immutable distributed collection of elements of your data,partitioned across nodes in your cluster that can be operated in parallel with a low-level API that offers transformations and actions.❖ Good for dataset low-level transformation, actions and control.❖ Good for unstructured data.❖ Good for functional programming data manipulation.❖ Not recommended for imposing a schema on your data.❖ Lacks some optimization and performance benefitsSpark’s Dataflow Programming ModelTransformations are relational ops, MR, etc. as functionsActions are what force computation; aka lazy evaluationSpark DF API and SparkSQL❖ Databricks now recommends SparkSQL/DataFrame API; avoid RDD AP unless really needed!❖ Key Reason: Automatic query optimization becomes more feasibleQuery Optimization in Spark❖ Common automatic query optimizations (from RDBMS world) are now performed in Spark’s Catalyst optimizer: ❖ Projection pushdown: Drop unneeded columns early on❖ Selection pushdown: Apply predicates close to base tables❖ Join order optimization: Not all joins are equally costly❖ Fusing of aggregatesComparing Spark’s APIsSpark-based Ecosystem of ToolsNew Paradigm of Data “Lakehouse”❖ Data “Lake”: Loose coupling of data file format and data/query processing stack (vs RDBMS’s tight coupling); many frontends References and More Material ❖ MapReduce/Hadoop:❖ MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on Large Clusters.❖ Spark:❖ Resilient Distributed Datasets: A Fault-tolerant Abstraction for In-memory Cluster Computing.Example: Batch Gradient Descent❖ Very similar to algebraic SQL; vector addition❖ Input Split: Shard table tuple-wise ❖ Map():❖ On tuple, compute per-example gradient; add these across examples in shard; emit partial sum with single dummy key ❖ Reduce():❖ Only one global dummy key, Iterator has partial gradients; just add all those to get full batch gradient.Primer: K-Means Clustering❖ Basic Idea: Identify clusters based on Euclidean distances; formulated as an optimization problemLlyod’s algorithm: Most popular heuristic for K-Means❖ Input: n x d examples/points❖ Output: k clusters and their centroids1. Initialize k centroid vectors and point-cluster ID assignment2. Assignment step: Scan dataset and assign each point to a clusterID based on which centroid is nearest3. Update step: Given new assignment, scan dataset again to recompute centroids for all clusters4. Repeat 2 and 3 until convergence or fixed # iterationsK-Means Clustering in MapReduce❖ Input Split: Shard the table tuple-wise❖ Assume each tuple/example/point has an ExampleID ❖ Need 2 jobs! 1 for Assignment step, 1 for Update step ❖ 2 external data structures needed for both jobs: ❖ Dense matrix A: k x d centroids; ultra-sparse matrix B: n x k assignments❖ A and B first broadcast to all Mappers via HDFS; Mappers can read small data directly from HDFS files❖ Job 1 read A and creates new B❖ Job 2 reads B and creates new AK-Means Clustering in MapReduce❖ A: k x d centroid matrix; B: n x k assignment matrix❖ Job 1 Map(): Read A from HDFS; compute point’s distance to all k centroids; get nearest centroid; emit new assignment as output pair(PointID, ClusterID)❖ No Reduce() for Job 1; new B now available on HDFS ❖ Job 2 Map(): Read B from HDFS; look into B and see which cluster point got assigned to; emit point as output pair (ClusterID, point vector)❖ Job 2 Reduce(): Iterator has all point vectors of a given ClusterID; add them up and divide by count; got new centroid; emit output pair as (ClusterID, centroid vector) Building Stage of ML Lifecycle❖ Perform model selection, i.e., convert prepared ML-ready data to prediction function(s) and/or other analytics outputs❖ What makes model building challenging/time-consuming?❖ Heterogeneity of data sources/formats/types❖ Configuration complexity of ML models ❖ Large scale of data❖ Long training runtimes of some models❖ Pareto optimization on criteria for application❖ Evolution of data-generating process/application ❖ Perform model selection, i.e., convert prepared ML-ready data to prediction function(s) and/or other analytics outputsData scientist / ML engineer must steer 3 key activities that
invoke ML training and inference as sub-routines:1. Feature Engineering (FE): Appropriate signals representation for domain of prediction function.2. Algorithm/Architecture Selection (AS): Choice of prediction functions class (incl. artificial neural networks (ANN) architecture).3. Hyper-parameter Tuning (HT): Model improvement(accuracy, etc.) by configuring ML “knobs”Model Selection Process❖ Model selection is usually an iterative exploratory process with human making decisions on FE, AS, and/or HT❖ Increasingly, automation of some or all parts possible: AutoML ❖ Decisions on FE, AS, HT guided by many constraints/metrics: prediction accuracy, data/feature types, interpretability, tool availability, scalability, runtimes, fairness, legal issues, etc. ❖ Decisions are typically application-specific and dataset-specific; recall Pareto surfaces and tradeoffsFeature Engineering❖ Converting prepared data into a feature vector representation forML training and inference❖ Aka feature extraction, representation extraction, etc.❖ Umbrella term for many tasks dep. on type of ML model trained:1. Recoding and value conversions2. Joins and/or aggregates3. Feature interactions4. Feature selection5. Dimensionality reduction6. Temporal feature extraction7. Textual feature extraction and embeddings8. Learned feature extraction in deep learning 1. Recoding and value conversions❖ Common on relational/tabular data❖ Typically needs some global column stats + code to reconvert each tuple (example’s feature values) Example:Decision trees can use categorical features directly but GLMs support only numeric features; need numerical vector such as one-hot Encoded, weight of evidence / target encoding, integer encoding, embedding (via additional DL model), etc Example:GLMs and ANNs need standardization (either mean/stdev or min/max based) and decorrelationScaling global stats: How to scale mean/stdev/max/min?Reconversion: Tuple-level function to modify number using stats. How to scale?Example:Some models like Bayesian Networks or Markov Logic Networks benefit from (or even need) binning/discretization of numerics Scaling global stats: How to scale histogram computations?Reconversion: Tuple-level function to convert number to bin ID2. Joins and Aggregates❖ Common on relational/tabular data❖ Most real-world relational datasets are multi-table; require key-foreign key joins, aggregation-and-key-key-joins, etc.3. Polynomials and Feature Interactions❖ Sometimes used on relational/tabular data, especially for high-bias models like GLMs❖ Pairwise is common; ternary is not unheard of❖ No global stats, just a tuple-level function❖ Popularity of this has reduced due to GBMs popularity for tabular data, which encode nonlinearities and interactions as part of the learning process.4. Feature Selection❖ Often used on high dimensional relational/tabular data❖ Basic Idea: Instead of using whole feature set, use a subset❖ Formulated as a discrete optimization problem❖ NP-Hard in #features in general❖ Many heuristics exist in ML/data mining; typically rely on some information theoretic criteria❖ Typically scaled as “outer loops” over training/inference❖ Some ML users also prefer human-in-the-loop approach5. Dimensionality Reduction❖ Often used on relational/structured/tabular data❖ Basic Idea: Transforms features to a different latent space❖ Examples: Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Matrix factorization❖ Feat. sel. preserves semantics of each feature but dim. red. typically does not—combines features in “nonsensical” ways❖ Scaling this is non-trivial! Similar to scaling individual ML training algorithms (later)6. Temporal Feature Extraction❖ Many relational/tabular data have time/date❖ Per-example reconversion to extract numerics/categoricals❖ Sometimes global stats needed to calibrate time❖ Complex temporal features studied in time series mining Reconversion: Tuple-level function (many-to-one) to extract numbers/categories 7. Textual Feature Extraction❖ Many relational/tabular data have text columns; in NLP, whole example is often just text❖ Most classifiers cannot process text/strings directly❖ Extracting numerics from text studied in text mining Example:Bag-of-words features: count number of times each word in a given vocabulary arises; need to know vocabulary first Scaling global stats: How to get vocabulary?Reconversion: Tuple-level function to count words; look up index ❖ Knowledge Base-based: Domain-specific knowledge bases like entity dictionaries (e.g., celebrity or chemical names) help extract domain-specific features ❖ Embedding-based:❖ Numeric vector for a text token; popular in NLP ❖ Offline training of function from string to numeric vector in self-supervised way on large text corpus (e.g., Wikipedia); embedding dimensionality is a hyper-parameter ❖ Pre-trained word embeddings (Word2Vec and GloVe) and sentence embeddings (Doc2Vec) available off-the-shelf; to scale, just use a tuple-level conversion function8. Learned Feature Extraction in DL❖ A big win of Deep Learning (DL) is no manual feature engineering on unstructured data❖ DL is not common on structured/tabular data, but growing in popularity. See: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.01889.pdf❖ DL is very versatile: almost any data type as input and/or output:❖ Convolutional NNs (CNNs) over image tensors❖ Recurrent NNs (RNNs) and Transformers over text❖ Graph NNs (GNNs) over graph-structured data❖ Neural architecture specifies how to extract and transform features internally with weights that are learned❖ Software 2.0: Buzzword for such “learned feature extraction” programs vs old hand-crafted feature engineeringHyper-Parameter Tuning❖ Hyper-parameters: Knobs for an ML model or training algorithm to control bias-variance tradeoff in a dataset-specific manner to make learning effective❖ Examples:❖ GLMs: L1 or L2 regularizer to constrain weights❖ All gradient methods: learning rate❖ Mini-batch Stochastic Gradient Descent: batch size❖ HT is an “outer loop” around training/inference❖ Most common approach: grid search; pick set of values for each hyperpa❖ Also common: random search to subsample from grid❖ Complex AutoML heuristics exist too for HT, e.g., BayesianAlgorithm Selection in “classical” ML❖ Not much to say; ML user typically picks models/algorithms in advance❖ Best practice: first train more simple models (log. reg.) as baselines; then try more complex models (XGBoost)❖ Ensembles: Build diverse models and aggregate predictions. Even for tabular data, ensembles yield better results and often win Kaggle comps with a few % boost in performance.❖ More critical in DL; neural arch. is inductive bias in classical ML parlance; controls feature learning and bias-variance tradeoff❖ Some applications: Many off-the-shelf pre-trained DL models to do“transfer learning,” e.g., see models at HuggingFace.co ❖ Other applications: Swap pain of hand-crafted feature eng. for pain of neural arch. eng.! Neural arch probably a better interview skillAutomated Model Selection / AutoML❖ It depends. HT and most of FE already automated mostly in practice;(neural) AS is often application-dictated❖ AutoML tools/systems now aim to reduce data scientist’s work; or even replace them?! ;)Automated Model Selection / AutoMLQ: Can we automate the whole model selection process?❖ Pros: Ease of use; lower human cost; easier to audit; improves ML accessibility❖ Cons: Higher resource cost; less user control; may waste domain knowledge; may leave performance on the table❖ Pareto-optima; hybrids possibleMajor ML Model Families/TypesGeneralized Linear Models (GLMs); from statisticsBayesian Networks; inspired by causal reasoningDecision Tree-based: CART, Random Forest, Gradient-BoostedTrees (GBT), etc.; inspired by symbolic logicSupport Vector Machines (SVMs); inspired by psychologyArtificial Neural Networks (ANNs): Multi-Layer Perceptrons(MLPs), Convolutional NNs (CNNs), Recurrent NNs (RNNs),Transformers, etc.; inspired by brain neuroscience Unsupervised: Clustering (e.g., K-Means), Matrix Factorization, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), etc.Scalable ML Training Systems❖ Scaling ML training is involved and model type-dependent ❖ Orthogonal Dimensions of Categorization:1. Scalability: In-memory libraries vs Scalable ML system(works on larger-than-memory datasets)2. Target Workloads: General ML library vs Decision treeoriented vs De3. Implementation Reuse: Layered on top of scalable data system vs Custom from-scratch frameworkModel Serving / Deployment❖ A trained/learned ML model is just a prediction function:f: Dx → Dy ❖ A major consideration is, online/realtime vs. offline/batch. ❖ In the offline scenario, serving a model is more trivial where it is another processing function that we apply.❖ In the online scenario, we become concerned with millisecond latency for responses, setting up APIs, load balancing, and monitoring.