Data as File: Other Common Formats
Machine Perception data layer on tensors and/or time-series Myriad binary formats, typically with (lossy) compression, e.g., WAV for audio, MP4 for video, etc.
Text File (aka plaintext): Human-readable ASCII characters
Docs/Multimodal File: Myriad app-specific rich binary formats
Virtualization of GRAM with Pages
Page: An abstraction of fixed size chunks of memory/storage
Makes it easier to virtualize and manage DRAM
Page Frame: Virtual slot in DRAM to hold a page’s content
Page size is usually an OS configuration parameter
E.g., 4KB to 16KB
OS Memory Management has mechanisms to:
Identify pages uniquely (page frame 0 for OS)
Read/write page from/to disk when requested by a process Apportioning of DRAM: Elements A process’s Address Space:
Slice of virtualize DRAM assigned to it alone! OS “translates” DRAM vs disk address Page Replacement Policy:
When DRAM fills up, which cached page to evict? Many policies in OS literature Memory Leaks:
Process forgot to “free” pages used a while ago
Wastes DRAM and slows down system
Garbage Collection:
Some PL implementations can auto-reclaim some wasted memory
Storing Data In Memory
Any data structure in memory is overlaid on pages
Process can ask OS for more memory in System Call API If OS denies, process may crash Apache Arrow:
Emerging standard for columnar in-memory data layout Compatible with Pandas, (Py)Spark, Parquet, etc.
Persistent Data Storage
Hard Disk, CD, SSDs
SSDs has a key latency dichotomy for random vs. sequential data Volatile Memory: A data storage device that needs power/electricity to store bits; e.g., DRAM, CPU caches (SRAM)
Persistence: Program state/data is available intact even after process finishes
Non-Volatile or Persistent memory/storage: A data storage device that retains bits intact after power cycling
E.g., all levels below DRAM in memory hierarchy “Persistent Memory (PMEM)”: Marketing term for large DRAM that is backed up by battery power!
Non-Volatile RAM (NVRAM): Popular term for DRAM-like device that is genuinely non-volatile (no battery)
Note: PMEM and NVRAM are typically used in high-performance servers and storage systems where fast, reliable access to data is critical.
Disk and Data Organization on Disk
Disk: Aka secondary storage; likely holds the vast majority of the world’s day-to-day business-critical data!
Data storage/retrieval units: disk blocks or pages
Unlike RAM, different disk pages have different retrieval times based on location:
Need to optimize layout of data on disk pages
Orders of magnitude performance gaps possible
Disk space is organized into files
Files are made up of disk pages aka blocks(basic unit) Typical disk block/page size: 4KB or 8KB:
Basic unit of reads/writes for a disk
OS/RAM page is not the same as disk page!
Typically, [OS/RAM page size] = [Disk page size] but not always; disk page can be a multiple, e.g., 1MB
File data (de-)allocated in increments of disk pages
Magnetic Hard Disks
Key Principle: Sequential vs. Random Access Dichotomy Accessing disk pages in sequential order gives higher throughput Random reads/writes are OOM slower!
Need to carefully lay out data pages on disk, not the case for DRAM Abstracted away by data systems: Dask, Spark, RDBMSs, etc.
Flash SSD vs. Magnetic Hard Disks
Random reads/writes are not much worse
Different locality of reference for data/file layout
But still block-addressable like HDDs
Data access latency: 100x faster! (Note: Access ~ Lookup)
Data transfer throughput: Also 10-100x higher (Note: Access ~ Read/Write
Parallel read/writes more feasible Cost per GB is 5-15x higher!
Read-write impact asymmetry; much lower lifetimes
NVRAM vs. Magnetic Hard Disks NVRAM is like a non-volatile form of DRAM, but with similar capacity as SSDs
Random R/W with less to no SSD-style wear and tear
Byte-addressability (not blocks like SSDs/HDDs) Spatial locality of reference like DRAM; radical change!
Latency, throughput, parallelism, etc. similar to DRAM
Alas, limited to HPC and enterprise environments